these are the times said Thomas Paine
the try men's souls and they're trying
ours now this is a fateful moment in the
history of the West we've seen divisive
elections and divided societies we've
seen a growth of extremism in politics
and religion all of it fueled by anxiety
uncertainty and fear of a world that's
changing almost faster than we can bear
and the shore knowledge that it's going
to change faster still I have a friend
in Washington I asked Morty was it like
being in America during the recent
presidential election he said to me well
it was like the man sitting on the deck
of the Titanic with a glass of whiskey
in his hand and he's saying I know I
asked for ice
but this is ridiculous
so is there something we can do each of
us to be able to face the future without
fear I think there is and one way into
it is to see that perhaps the most
simple way into a culture and into an
age is to ask what do people worship
people have worship so many different
things that some the stars the storm
some people worship many gods someone
some nun in the 19th and 20th centuries
people worshiped the nation the Aryan
race the communist state what do we
worship I think future anthropologists
will take a look at the books we read on
self-help self-realization self-esteem
they look at the way we talk about
morality as being true to oneself the
way we talk about politics as a matter
of individual rights and they look at
this wonderful new religious ritual we
have created you know the one called the
selfie and I think they'll conclude that
what we worship in our time is the self
for me the eye and this is great it's
liberating it's empowering it's
wonderful but don't forget that
biologically with social animals we
spent most of our evolutionary history
in small groups
we need those face to face interactions
where we learn the choreography of
altruism and where we create those
spiritual goods like friendship and
trust and loyalty and love that redeem
our solitude when we have too much of
the eye and too little of the wing we
can find ourselves vulnerable
and alarm it was no accident that sherry
Turkle of MIT called the book she wrote
on the impact of social media alone
together so I think the simplest way of
safeguarding the future you is to
strengthen the future us in three
dimensions the arts of relationship yes
of identity and the us of responsibility
so let me first take the art of a
relationship and here forgive me if I
get personal once upon a time a very
long time ago I was a 20 year old
undergraduate studying philosophy I was
into Nietzsche and Schopenhauer and
Sartre and Camus I was full of
ontological uncertainty and existential
angst it was terrific
I was self-obsessed and thoroughly
unpleasant to know until one day I saw
across the courtyard ago who is
everything that I wasn't she radiated
sunshine she emanated joy I found out
her name was Elaine we met we talked we
married and 47 years three children and
eight grandchildren later I can safely
say was the best decision I ever took in
my life because it's the people not like
us that make us grow and that is why I
think we have to do just that the
trouble with Google filters Facebook
friends and reading the news by
narrowcasting rather than broadcasting
means that we're surrounded almost
entirely by people like us whose views
whose opinions whose prejudices even are
just like ours and Cass Sunstein of
Harvard has shown that if we surround
ourselves with people with the same
views as us we get more extreme I think
we need to renew those face-to-face
encounters with the
not like us I think we need to do that
in order to realize that we can disagree
strongly and yet still stay friends it's
in those face-to-face encounters that we
discover that the people not like us are
just people like us and actually every
time we hold out the hand of friendship
to what somebody not like us whose class
or creed or color a different from ours
we heal one of the fractures of our
wounded world that is the us of a
relationship second is the us of
identity let me give you a thought
experiment I've given to Washington have
you seen the memorials absolutely
fascinating there's the Lincoln Memorial
Gettysburg Address on one side second
inaugural on the other you go to the
Jefferson Memorial screeds of text
Martin Luther King memorial more than a
dozen quotes from his speeches
I didn't realize in America you read
memorials now go to the equivalent in
London in Parliament Square and you will
see that the monument to David Lloyd
George contains three words David Lloyd
George Nelson Mandela gets to charge
you'll get just one Churchill why the
difference I'll tell you why the
difference because America was from the
outset a nation of wave after wave of
immigrants so it had to create an
identity which he did by telling a story
which you learnt at school you read on
memorials knew heard repeated in
presidential inaugural addresses Britain
until recently wasn't the nation of
immigrants so it could take identity for
granted the trouble is now the two
things have happened which shouldn't
have happened together the first thing
is in the West we've stopped telling the
story of who we are and why even in
America and at the same time immigration
is higher than it ever been before
so when you tell the story and your
identity is strong you can welcome the
stranger but when you stop telling the
story your identity gets weak and you
feel threatened by the stranger and
that's bad
I tell you Jews have been scattered and
dispersed and exiled for 2,000 years we
never lost our identity why because at
least once a year on the festival of
Passover we told our story and we taught
it to our children and we at the
unleavened bread of affliction then
tasted the bitter herbs of slavery so we
never lost our identity I think
collectively we've got to get back to
telling our story who we are where we
came from what ideals by which we live
and if that happens we are will become
strong enough to welcome the stranger
and say come and share our lives share
our stories share our aspirations and
dreams that is the us of identity and
finally the us of a responsibility do
you know something my favorite phrase in
all of politics very American phrase is
We the People why we the people because
it says that we all share collective
responsibility for our collective future
and that's how things really are and
should be have you noticed how magical
thinking has taken over our politics so
we say all you going to do is elect this
strong leader and he or she will solve
all our problems for us believe me that
is magical thinking and then we get the
extremes so far right the far left the
extreme religious and the extreme anti
religious the far right dreaming of a
golden age that never was
the far-left dreaming of a utopia that
never will be and the religious and anti
religious equally convinced that all it
takes is God or the absence of God to
save us from ourselves
that too is magical thinking because the
only people who will save us from
ourselves is we the people all of us
together and when we do that and when we
move from the posix of me to the
politics of all of us together we
rediscover those beautiful
counterintuitive truths that a nation is
strong when it cares for the weak that
it becomes rich when it cares for the
poor it becomes invulnerable when it
cares about the vulnerable that is what
makes great nation
so here is my simple suggestion it might
just change your life and it might just
help to begin to change the world do a
search and replace operation on the text
of your mind and wherever you encounter
the word self substitute the word other
so instead of self help other help
instead of self esteem other esteem and
if you do that you will begin to feel
the power of what for me is one of the
most moving sentences in all of
religious literature though I walk
through the valley of the shadow of
death I will fear no evil for you are
with me we can face any future without
fear so long as we know we will not face
it alone so for the sake of the future
you together let us strengthen the
future us thank you
[Applause]